Hamas has terrorist
attacks against Israel, and Israel's
military actions in Gaza
have unleashed
a firestorm of controversy
in the United States and Europe.
Watching it all, I do wonder.
Does anyone believe
in free speech anymore?
Now to note,
I have strongly condemned
the attacks of October 7th
and I think those that praise Hamas
in any way
are blind to the reality that it has been
the principal opponent
of a two state solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian question.
But the question to grapple
with is how to handle views
that either side finds deeply offensive.
And, of course, speech and assembly
are not the same as physical intimidation
and harassment
which prevent civil discourse.
Until very recently,
most concerns
about free speech on college
campuses were related
to conservative speakers
from Ben Shapiro
to Condoleezza Rice
being protested or disinvited.
Conservative state
legislator has introduced dozens of laws
to protect campus free speech.
In 2021,
House Republicans started a campus
free speech caucus
to protect
free expression and free association
in January 2021.
Florida Governor
Ron DeSantis said
the most important legislative issue
to get right
in the next
couple of years
was the protection
of controversial speech.
Not anymore.
Late last month,
DeSantis reversed course,
directing Florida State
University's chancellor
to close down
campus chapters of Students
for Justice and Palestine.
DeSantis accused the group
of giving material support to terrorism.
Though,
as far as I can tell,
these groups have only organized protests
and rallies,
as the GOP
presidential candidate
Vivek Ramaswamy has pointed out.
Courts have made clear
that verbal support for extremist groups
is very different
and constitutionally protected
from sending money, material or arms
Other conservatives have
tried to publicly identify
and shame students
belonging to groups
that voiced support for Hamas.
A hedge fund manager
proposed to circulate
lists of these students
to ensure that they don't get jobs.
Many donors have demanded
that universities
issue statements
either condemning Hamas
or supporting Israel
Some even insisting that certain rallies
and speakers be banned.
Many college
presidents issued follow up statements
when their original responses
were not seen as sufficiently strong
and said
their support of Israel
or denunciation of Hamas.
This is all a far cry
from where universities used to be
like that in 1967
in the midst of the passions
of the Vietnam War
and the civil rights movement.
A report by a University of Chicago
committee chaired
by the eminent legal scholar
Harry Calvin, eloquently argued that
the mission of the university
could not be fulfilled if the institution
formally took positions
on controversial
political issues of the day.
The committee wrote a university.
If it's to be true to its faith,
an intellectual inquiry
must embrace, be hospitable to
and encourage
the widest diversity of views
within its own community.
It is a community,
but only for the limited,
albeit great
purposes of teaching and research.
It is not a club.
It is not a trade association.
It is not a lobby.
Simply put,
the university is the home
and sponsor of critics.
It is not itself the critic.
The basic argument for free speech
espoused by the Calvin report
is that it is better to hear those
you violently disagree with
than to ban them or silence them.
That way, debate happens out in the open
points a match with counterpoints.
The alternative is to drive
discourse into the shadows
and gutters of political life
where it festers
turns into conspiracy theories
and often erupts into violence.
Growing up in India, I read
with wonder
about the United States's commitment
to freedom of speech,
which was so strong that in 1977
a court ruled that a group of Nazis
should be allowed to march
in Skokie, Illinois or Chicago.
Suburb.
In the 1970s,
the Harvard Crimson ran
editorials
praising Pol Pot's takeover in Cambodia.
I went to college in the early eighties,
an area
in which
it was not unusual
to hear incendiary views on campus
from communist
revolutionaries to the Nobel Prize
winning scientist William Shockley,
who made crude arguments
about the racial inferiority
of black people in this century.
I recall very few colleges
making official statements
about the Iraq war
or even the terrorist attacks of Nine 11.
We are now in a different world.
In recent years,
the pressure on universities
to take political positions has grown.
A turning point
might have been
the murder of George Floyd last night,
when many institutions decided
to demonstrate their sensitivity.
An issue statements.
Once they took a stand on one
political issue,
it is perfectly understandable
that they have been
also asked to condemn
Hamas's attack last month.
But where will it end?
A Pandora's box has been opened
with every major political event.
University administrators
will have to decide
whether to condemn or support it.
Will they find some standard
by which they can explain
why they denounced one terrorist attack
or human rights abuse, but not another
I'm not sure
what it
signifies that many of us
find the embrace
of free speech
outlined in the Calvin
report to be too cold in its neutrality.
We want our institutions to endorse
our own fashions and points of view.
But can they do that
in a diverse society?
In which people disagree
so strongly on so much?
I fear that
far from bringing us together,
the path we are on will drive us
further apart.